this video is brought to you by my
patrons if you'd like to support my
channel and get access to extras like
audio commentaries a patron exclusive
podcast and uncut videos you can join by
clicking the link in the description
over the last several years there have
been demands for more lgbtq
representation in Hollywood movies but
something that many people don't know is
that the first movie to ever win best
picture at the Academy Awards was also
the first major Hollywood film to show a
gay kiss William a Wellman's film Wings
released in
1927. in Wings two World War One
aviators compete for the affections of
the same woman while coming to terms
with their growing feelings for one
another despite being labeled a
friendship for the duration of the film
perhaps to circumvent censorship
requirements it is evident that these
two men are developing romantic feelings
for one another made clear by the
climactic dramatic kiss Wellman's silent
film captures one of the earliest
examples of lgbtq cinema by carefully
Towing the censorship line the film
examines the expressed passions of two
men entangled in the conflict of World
War One and the emotional torment of the
Forbidden connection wing went on to be
a box office Smash and even at a time
when the film industry was quickly
transitioning to sound became the only
truly silent film to win best picture
but Wings is actually not where our
Story begins the history of Hollywood
has always had an asterisk beside it
hidden in the footnotes in tiny little
print are the queer actors filmmakers
Executives and tradespeople that helped
turn Hollywood from a Backwater Orange
Grove in California to the city in which
thousands of young dreamers make their
way each year in hopes of becoming a
star it's a long story and like most
classic American Tales it actually
doesn't begin in America at all foreign
[Music]
foreign
the love that dared not speak its name
in America was surprisingly fluent when
speaking German throughout the silent
era of film while America was using its
new toy to glorify the old west
recreating The Fading dreams of its own
mythology European Cinema was shaping a
more realistic look at the diversity of
sex and gender in much of Europe at the
time homosexuality was often just
another aspect of the Panorama of Human
Relationships The Institute for sexual
science founded by Dr Magnus hirschfeld
became Ground Zero in the fight against
Germany's anti-gay paragraph 175 which
criminalized homosexual actions between
men during the era of the sexual
Enlightenment that occurred in pre-war
Berlin it also produced the first film
to discuss homosexuality openly and to
contain many of the fundamental issues
of the Gay Liberation movement directed
by Richard Oswald different from the
others released in 1919 openly pleaded
tolerance for what is termed the third
sex the program given out at screenings
even read false beliefs and unjustified
prejudices concerning a sector of male
and female sexual behavior known as
homosexuality or love of the same sex
have been predominant up to the present
and still influence a large part of our
population these homosexual men and
women who are attracted to persons of
their own sex are often regarded as
wicked criminals and Libertines but
scientific research has determined that
homosexuality is an inborn tendency for
which the individual cannot be held
responsible there are homosexuals in
every class among the educated and among
the uneducated and in the highest and
lowest sectors of the population in the
great cities and the small towns among
the strict moralists and among the most
easy-going that love for one's own sex
can be just as pure and Noble as love
for the opposite sex
the only difference being the object of
Desire not the nature of one's love the
film along with other films from the
same era that dealt with topics such as
abortion incest sex education and
venereal disease was propagandistic in
its approach in the early 1930s Nazis
were responsible for the destruction of
most prints of the film Christopher
isherwood recalls at the time that Nazis
frequently disrupted screenings of the
film in Vienna one of them discharged a
handgun into the crowd injuring multiple
people in his book Christopher and His
Kind isherwood provides a first-person
description of the movie three scenes
remain in my memory
one is that a ball at which the dancers
all male are standing fully clothed in
what seems about to become a daisy chain
it is here that the character played by
Conrad veit meets The blackmailer Who
seduces him and then ruins him
the next scene is a vision in which Vite
has a long procession of Kings poets
scientists philosophers and other famous
victims of homophobia moving slowly and
sadly with hands bowed Dr hirschfeld
himself appears
I think the corpse of Conrad veit who
has committed suicide at this point is
laying in the background
hirschfeld delivers a speech that is to
say a series of titles pleading
tolerance for the third sex and so it
was that the very first gay man to ever
be portrayed on film met his tragic End
by taking his own life this would
determine the future of LGBT characters
on film and television for many years to
come the suicide of Vite and the idea of
blackmail predicted the fates of
American Screen characters who would
suffer for their sexuality in like
manner when American Cinema reached a
similar point of inclusion
about 50 years later it would appear
that the recognition of the third sex in
Europe was not associated with a
particular concept of masculinity as was
the case in the United States the focus
of the drama and Intrigue was not on the
sexual aspects of the passions that were
awakened in human relationships rather
the emotional qualities of the passions
that were aroused in human relationships
in Mikhail produced in 1924 we see a gay
love story in which a famous artist
falls in love with his young male model
the model however is an opportunist who
saps his benefactor's artistic Spirit
eventually spurning his affections for
the more promising charms of a wealthy
young princess in the end the artist
leaves all of his possessions to the
youth and on his deathbed declares
I can die in peace
I have known a great love
the film which was adapted from the book
of the same name was released in America
for a limited time in 1926 under murky
circumstances what would come to be
titled chained the story of the third
sex ran for a short time at New York's
Fifth Avenue Playhouse American sensors
objected to its first issued English
title the inverts the modifications to
the titles provide an excellent
illustration of the American thinking
about homosexuality during that time
period the subtitle the story of the
third sex suggests that any narrative
that deals with gay love regardless of
how seriously it does so is considered
to be a story about homosexuality while
stories that deal with heterosexual love
are simply seen as stories this appears
to be just as much of an issue for
American filmmakers and producers today
as they appear to be unable to conceive
of the existence of queer characters in
a movie unless the subject matter of the
movie is itself being Queer as
understood and depicted by
mostly straight people this discussion
of gay men shouldn't suggest that
lesbians didn't also get attention in
the film Pandora's Box which was
originally shown in Germany in 1929
there is a figure who is most likely the
first lesbian on screen to be portrayed
overtly
the film presented the story of the
great unrequited love and passion
between two women the Countess keshvitz
and the lady she is enamored with Lulu
although the love that geschvitz feels
for Lulu is referred to as sterile
within the context of the movie it is a
driving force in the action and it makes
the introduction of a Sapphic passion on
screen an exciting and historical
cinematic event an event American
audiences likely would never know of
British sensors deleted the character of
Countess geschwitz from the film before
Prince were sent off to America though
original German Prince did eventually
make it across the pond in the 1960s
when it comes to American-made gay
characters one of the earliest direct
references to homosexuality was a parody
which is predictable I suppose the one
real comedy short the soilers starring
Stan Laurel was a parody of the
successful Western the spoilers
a drawn out battle sequence between the
film's lead Laurel and a corrupt Sheriff
takes up the majority of the running
time but another very gay cowboy
suddenly appears on the screen in the
middle of the brawl as the two men
continue to quarrel he makes a show of
batting his eyes at both of them and
primping a little bit before sashaying
out of the room
Laurel wins the fight against the
sheriff but no one appears to care
as a result he is left sitting outside
the tavern looking disheartened the gay
cowboy pokes his head out of a second
floor window and lavishly blows Laurel a
kiss while mouthing the words my hero
when Laurel rejects him
he drops a flower pot on his head
this is one of the first examples of the
use of the harmless image to
present homosexuality in film but in the
context of rough and tough men in the
soon-to-be industry-dominant Western
genre we were laying the foundations of
the Trope from the word go there is a
very overt connection between the
effeminate and apparent homosexual in
this film even though the cowboy was not
supposed to be impersonating a woman the
primping and fussing characteristics
that he displayed were unmistakably
those of a woman at least as men at the
time expected women to act the comedy
here was highlighting how out of place
this boy was in the Rough and
Tumble world of the men who won the West
the irony of course is that there is
significant historical evidence to
suggest that the West Was in fact Rife
with gay men many from Europe and was
largely settled by women in sex work
however even though the soilers is a
mockery of queerness among other things
the use of satire indicates that
homosexuality especially in the context
of it existing in traditionally
masculine spaces was on the mind of the
public at large satire can't function
well if it's not deriving context from
popular ideas even as the Cowboy
isn't flattering though he is slaying
his inclusion indicates that the public
was perhaps at the time willing to
accept us as harmless
though strange and out of place however
this was precisely the kind of event
that the sensors were keeping an eye out
for public ordinances already enabled
censoring organizations around the
country to look at pictures in advance
of public showings although all of those
such entities had little actual
Authority the rules for Morality In the
movies clearly mentioned sex perversion
as a key don't
even if queerness was the subject of
ridicule
the United States Supreme Court ruled in
1915 the exhibition of Motion Pictures
is a business pure and simple and is
conducted for profit like other
spectacles not to be regarded or
intended to be regarded as a part of the
presence of the nation or the organs of
public opinion this decision meant that
movies were not protected by the First
Amendment guarantee of free speech due
to this ruling harsh censorship
legislation was eventually enacted in
the states of New York Florida
Massachusetts Maryland and Virginia
within just a few years following the
Judgment the gold standard in the United
States was in the New York statute
passed in 1921
it stated that a film should be licensed
by the state unless such a film or part
thereof is of such character that its
exhibition would tend to corrupt morals
or incite crime the indecency immorality
and obscenity were nowhere described or
defined in the statute and thus there
was considerable latitude for
interpretation essentially giving free
reign to wealthy white right-wing
Christian men to dictate what could and
could not be in any given film released
in these states one of the first
instances of lesbians kissing on screen
was in a brief orgy scene in Cecil B
demille's manslaughter in 1922 the
vision of two passionate women locked in
a forbidden Embrace was used by demil to
condemn the excesses of sex that he was
portraying so graphically and
excessively in return for his judgment
on the crime he was consistently allowed
to paint a more explicit picture of evil
especially sexual sins than was
ordinarily permitted by Hollywood sense
users showing things like sex
homosexuality interracial relationships
and other such things was fine as long
as the participants were punished this
was particularly true when the
retribution transpired in a Biblical
City quoting scripture on their title
cards DeMille films became moral lessons
rather than exploitation or so was said
they also became box office
extravaganzas which leads me to wonder
just how far back the connection between
these distinctly American sets of Pop
Christianity neopuritanical values and
American entertainment really goes by
1922 there were censorship bills before
the legislature of 32 states and
throughout the nation the distinct rank
of moral indignation was wafting its way
toward an industry that at times seemed
to embody Wicked behavior of all kinds
the sensors were horrified by Salome a
1923 film with a reportedly all Queer
cast made in tribute to Oscar Wilde
forcing several sequences to be cut
altogether including one showing the gay
relationship between two Syrian Soldiers
the handwritten report of the exam
limiting sensor in New York concluded
this picture is in no way religious in
theme or interpretation in my judgment
it is a story of depravity in immorality
made worse because of its biblical
background
absolutely sacrilegious American sensors
became even more potent in the late
1920s and early 30s the inclusion of
audio into what were briefly dubbed as
talkies brought a new element of realism
to the screen and public morality
Watchdogs began to Bear Down on the
industry but while censorship laws were
becoming more specific their outlook on
gay representation was kept vaguely
broad you didn't need two men or women
kissing to get banned cross-dressing
weakness or softness in male characters
and even overly intellectual male
characters were enough to draw the ire
of sensors will Hayes was appointed
president of the motion picture
producers and Distributors of America or
mppda in the late 1920s Hayes served as
both an elder and the Presbyterian
church and as a former Postmaster
General of the United States that was
the extent of his qualifications the
organization was established primarily
with the goals of fostering positive
public relations for the studios and
shielding the business from the
potential of more restrictions from the
outside world which they mostly achieved
in 1930 when the motion picture
production code which served as the
basis for the industry's self-regulation
and censorship was actually written when
the code was strengthened in 1934 under
intense pressure from the Catholic
Church even gently eluded gay characters
began to disappear the image of the film
business as being harsh and manly with
no tolerance for foolishness was in
continual conflict with the industry's
reputation for being effeminate the
sensors used the archetype to
Target on-screen characters using it as
a thinly veiled scapegoat to put
pressure on a relatively Progressive
media industry which had been a safe
haven for queer creators of all types up
to that but filmmakers knew how to skirt
the sensors in many cases the fact that
most early movies sissies were only gay
if one chose to see them as being gay
was simply a reflection of the fact that
the existence of queer people in society
was acknowledged only when and Society
chose to do so instead of being overtly
queer characters like say the Femme
Cowboy from the soilers were viewed as
symbols for failed masculinity rather
than actual homosexuals and so they were
allowed to stick around most sissies
during the reign of the code were not
necessarily demeaned nor were they used
in Cruel or offensive ways it was not
the but what he stood for that was
offensive some actors created memorable
galleries of gossipy snoops and snippy
shopkeepers who were often a little bit
on the innocent side
but not always gays were also associated
with dangerous revolutionaries hiding
beneath the surface of normal society
the ghetto was one other world in which
gay characters might frequently be seen
on screen before and after the reign of
the motion picture code this represented
the reality of the majority of gay
experiences at the time which had been
restricted to manifestations and slums
of one kind or another the underground
Life as a shelter for gays is a common
theme in many instances the gay ghetto
has been linked to the criminal
underground this is due to the fact that
whenever there is an increase in illegal
activity of any kind even homosexuality
organized crime moves in to take control
of the situation and make a profit
though it should be noted that organized
crime functions vary differently than
Hollywood often depicts and in some
cases especially from the 1940s onward
can be beneficial to a growing community
in preventing gentrification and
climbing rental rates though as far as
Hollywood played into misconception of
criminal Behavior homosexuals were
widely considered to be a criminal Group
which differentiated them from other
types of minority groups crime rates
might be high in some majority non-white
areas but just being a person of color
was not itself technically illegal
though representatives of law
enforcement may act otherwise the film
blood Money released in 1933 showed a
great deal of ambiguous sexual tension
in The Wider underworld in the movie the
existence of homosexuality is openly
acknowledged in the subculture that is a
shelter on the fringes of acceptable
Society in the film Sandra Shaw is
featured in several sequences as a
fun-loving blonde who likes men's
clothes
at one point in the film her boyfriend
is preparing for a date along with his
sister a nightclub owner who warns him
about the kind of women he's running
with
oh this one is nothing but Claire
where's the miracle and a man of tuxedo
though he gets what she means and
protests later in the film Shaw turns up
again in a tweed jacket this time with
another woman in tow movies like this
were what led to further intensification
of censorship in the mid-1930s in
addition to strengthening the code will
Hayes reacted to criticism by inserting
morality Clauses into the contracts of
actors and compiled a doom book of 117
names of those deemed unsafe because of
their personal lives homosexuality was
denied as fervently off-screen as it was
on
a literally unspeakable part of the
culture Hollywood has always been more
restrained on screen than in real life
in Blood Money homosexuality is just
another pocket of an underworld that
exists outside the law sexual
connotations often surrounded the
attitudes of powerful men toward hired
boys or servile companions
although the villainous character of
Joel Cairo in the Maltese Falcon is
identified by Sam Spade secretary in the
novel as homosexual the film version
instead just turns him into a perfume
wearing Kane kissing with lace
handkerchiefs Elijah cook Jr as Sydney
Green Street's bodyguard Wilmer however
is implicitly homosexual he is referred
to as sunny boy and kid and Bogart
derisively calls him a gunzel since
about 1915 prisoners had used the German
word gonzal to mean a bottom especially
young inexperienced criminal bottoms all
of this was meant to connect the queer
underworld with the underworld run
mostly by the Sicilian Mafia who due to
movies like Scarface and Public Enemy
were roundly feared across the country
this fear the queer mindset was brought
to its logical conclusion in the horror
films of the 1930s where gays appeared
as predatory Twilight creatures with a
sense of style the equation of horror
with the sins of the flesh is easily
scene in Monster movies of the period
creatures like Frankenstein's monster
and Count Dracula were almost always
linked with the baser instincts of human
beings the essence of homosexuality as a
predatory weakness permeates the
depiction of gay characters in horror
films in Dracula's daughter countress
Maria zaleska has a special attraction
to women a preference that was even
highlighted in some of the original ads
for the film queer parallels in 1931's
Frankenstein and its 1935 sequel the
Bride of Frankenstein arose from a
vision that both films had of the
monster as an impossible anti-social
figure in the same way that gay people
were things that should not have
happened in both films the homosexuality
of director James whale may have been
the spark of the vision Robert Aldrich
director of the camp progenitor whatever
happened to Baby Jane recalls that Jimmy
whale was the first guy who was
blackballed because he refused to stay
in the closet Mitchell lisin and all
those other guys played it straight and
they were on board but whale said okay
I'm a great director and I don't have to
put up with this and he was a
great director not just a company
director and he was just unemployed
after that never worked again it should
be noted that many articles on James
whale do not reference his refusal to be
closeted nor the haze code in general as
a reason for the decline of his career
in spite of available first-hand
testimonials demonstrating that it
wasn't just a contributing factor that
it was the main reason and Aldrich who
was a company director if not an
incredibly good one would have been in
the know about what producers and Studio
heads were saying behind the scenes
according to Aldrich an obviously
lesbian director like Dorothy arsener
got away with her lifestyle because she
was officially closeted
a gay woman keeping her lifestyle on the
sly was fine because it made her one of
the boys but a man who like whale openly
admitted to his loving relationship with
another man in this case producer David
Lewis did not stand a chance although
James whale did work again briefly in
he fell Into Obscurity soon after in
1957 he was found dead at the bottom of
his swimming pool Frankenstein's monster
was the creation that would eventually
destroy its creator just as whale's own
aberration would eventually destroy his
career the monster in Frankenstein Bears
the brunt of society's reaction to his
existence and in the sequel the Bride of
Frankenstein the monster himself is
painfully aware of his own
unnaturalness in Frankenstein it is the
monster who limits Henry Frankenstein's
contact with the normal World The Old
Baron Frankenstein's father continually
begs his son to leave the madness to
come home and marry the young Elizabeth
finally the father Elizabeth and Henry's
best friend go to the lab to force him
for his own good to leave his creation
behind to be free of his obsession
to be normal
later the monster fulfills Mary
Shelley's initial prophecy of joining
his Creator on his wedding night and
thereby preventing the consummation of
the heterosexual marriage the monster is
then hunted by townspeople in The Bride
of Frankenstein it is the odd sisified
Doctor pretorius Who Comes to entice
Henry Frankenstein from his Bridal bed
in the middle of the night pretorius 2
has created life and Henry's curiosity
again overcomes his good instincts and
proves his downfall pretorius proclaims
himself to be in love with evil and
professes to detest goodness no accident
then that the monster is seeing the
unnaturalness and Folly of his own
existence takes to evil pretorius with
him when he pulls the lever to destroy
himself and his bride crying out to the
young heterosexual couple of Henry and
Elizabeth
you live
go
he'll stay
we belong dad in later decades the
queerness of the Frankenstein story
would reach its logical Camp conclusion
with The Rocky Horror Picture Show a
cult classic rock musical the 20th
Century Fox never gave a proper wide
release in the United States and it's
unlikely that now that they own It
Disney will either since 1976 the film
has been playing Midnight shows in
cities throughout the country a truly
subversive film on the subjects of
sexuality movies sex roles and the Queer
as Monster Rocky Horror features two
innocent presumed straight protagonists
Brad and Janet who have car troubles not
far from a dubious manner this
foreboding Mansion is the residence of
one Dr frankenferter the apotheosis of
deviant sexuality who introduces himself
as a Sweet Transvestite from transsexual
Transylvania frankenfurter is an
androgynous alien from outer space when
the timid straight couple arrive he is
in the process of showing off his latest
creation a hunky blonde named Rocky who
is straight off the slab and wearing
nothing but tight gold trunks pointing
to Rocky frankenferter sings Lusty in
seven days I can make you a man then
proceeds to introduce Brad and Janet to
well his penis possible penis we can't
know for certain he is an alien after
all as both a catalog and a spoof of old
monster movies and science fiction films
The Rocky Horror Picture Show becomes
almost dizzying in its references but
its most expert satire is of the age-old
fear with which mainstream Society
encounters deviant sexuality and is Then
followed through to the very end when
frankenfurter is destroyed for the good
of society nevertheless he has one last
chance in life to perform with the
entire cast an underwater ballet version
of the film's main message don't dream
it be it
a song that becomes a message of Hope
for everyone who feels like they're not
quite who they're supposed to be just
yet Tim Curry's performance especially
in his rendition of Sweet Transvestite
is the essence of what every parent in
America feared would happen if our
sexual standards were relaxed it becomes
the living horror of making deviant
sexuality visible and tangible in the
only kind of setting in which it could
possibly work an old dark house
populated by every letter of the lgbtq
alphabet soup as they sing rock and roll
to seduce the innocent youth of America
Hollywood didn't know what to do with
The Rocky Horror Picture Show then and
probably wouldn't know what to do with
it now but despite its shabby treatment
it has grossed hundreds of millions of
dollars over the years and continues to
play throughout the world audiences made
up of largely young people who attend
screenings with bags of rice stale toast
corsets boas and fishnets Rocky Horror
was shining a spotlight on the dimly lit
representation of queer monsters in the
1930s Golden Era of Hollywood giving
them one last hurray as a posthumous
Victory against the haze code which
collapsed entirely just a few years
before its release but back in the 1930s
filmmakers still had to be clever about
coding the characters specifically to
make it past the sensors
General American audiences though could
easily see through the coding
however
it wasn't long before the easily red
coating
was forced to become almost if not
completely
illegible
[Music]
in Hollywood's early years homosexuality
found its way on screen in ways both
secret and obvious to the filmmakers
behind the camera audiences rarely
pushed back against these depictions but
those who did were loud if not Legion
women's suffrage groups and the Catholic
Church were the most dedicated to
removing gay and lesbian content from
Hollywood movies and with the
institution of the motion picture
production code they more or less
succeeded filmmakers could now be fined
or blacklisted for including gay and
lesbian characters in their movies and
some films such as Dracula's daughter
were heavily edited to remove any overt
lesbian content but go figure a bunch of
people who came up in the industry
through artistic Roots knew how to
manipulate literary devices in visual
language to still include gay themes and
characters in their movies
though in much less obvious ways along
with World War II and a coming end to
what was referred to as the Golden Age
of Hollywood a time of gay invisibility
had swept over the industry but it was
an invisibility that you could see
through if you knew how to look even
though Hollywood didn't always tell the
truth this kept a lot of unwelcome facts
and small problems from getting in the
way of the American dream even though
gay and lesbian people were often the
ones who made these dreams come true
they were never a part of it it is said
that Sam Goldwin founder of Goldwyn
pictures which was one of the three
Studios that merged to create MGM once
wanted to film The Well of Loneliness by
Radcliffe Hall but when a producer told
him they couldn't because the main
character was a lesbian Goldwin simply
responded by saying so what we'll make
her American despite goldwyn's confusing
lesbian for Lebanese the Americanization
of lesbianism did happen and meant
nothing more than the simple refusal to
deal with it honestly it was an
imitation of the American fear of
sexuality in general and the American
duplicity regarding sexual deviance in
particular in all actuality it was the
same invisibility that gays experienced
in real life only replicated in the
movies despite this gays continued to
make an appearance as subtextual
Phantoms that represented the fear of
homosexuality itself they served as his
alien life forms that were yet firmly
established as per part of the culture
in every Walk of Life and they formed
the shadowy counterpart to the concept
of the American dream sissies and
tomboys were used as yardsticks for what
was deemed acceptable behavior in a
culture that was so preoccupied with the
upkeep of sex norms and the celebration
of everything masculine one performer
who happily ignored these sex Norms was
Greta Garbo whose performance as Queen
Christina in the film of the same name
released in 1934 was a challenge to the
standards of sexual and gender behavior
that were considered acceptable at the
time it was the Collision on screen of
her own androgynous aesthetic with the
reality of Christina's affinity for
masculine clothes and activities that
gave the picture a realism that was
uniquely its own Garbo who would Express
her desire to be in a film version of
Oscar Wilde's The Picture of Dorian Gray
with herself in the title role and
Marilyn Monroe as a young girl ruined by
Dorian created a particular dynamic in
Queen Christina one that penetrated the
queer Erasure of the script her for
Lauren longings to escape her gloomy
Destiny of marriage and her skillful
rejection of a series of male suitors
are broken in the first part of the film
by her encounter with the Countess ebba
Spar played by Elizabeth young their
brief scene together is charged with
sexuality and real affection in that
scene Garbo lifts the emotional barriers
to characterize her encounters with mail
suitors Abba suggests brightly that they
go for a sleigh ride but Christina tells
her sadly I can't know oh why not
ambassadors treaties councils how boring
later when pressed by a Statesman to
marry and produce an heir to the throne
Christina refuses
but your majesty you cannot tie an Old
Maid
I have no intention to Chancellor I
shall die a bachelor
her need to escape the role assigned her
by life was Christina's true driving
passion
Queen Christina makes this abundantly
clear she flees into the snow later in
the film when she discovers that
ebbespauer has betrayed her love that is
when she meets Antonio the one man who
seems to accept her and love her for all
the things that so horrify her court but
he falls in love with her thinking at
first that she's a man
and he seems quite willing to explore
whatever this strange situation may
bring in the early days of Hollywood
queen Christina stood out due to the
fact that it included a character that
was unmistakably bisexual as well as
many instances of bisexuality in The
Narrative of the film itself at the time
the lives of notable gay men and
lesbians were either portrayed in a
manner that was drastically different
from their actual experiences or were
not addressed at all in biographical
films this straight watching of History
has only marginally changed in modern
Cinema as seen by the fact that films
such as Troy A Beautiful Mind and the
imitation game more or less ignore or
completely erase the fact that its
primary characters are gay or bisexual
it's one of the reasons why audience
members were taken aback by the lesbian
relationships that were depicted in the
favorite even in the late 2010s
audiences of historical biopics
anticipated that queerness would be
erased from historical Recreations the
Betrayal of noted persons as
heterosexual without regard for their
true to life sexuality has never been
seen as a serious offense against a
person's identity until recently not
even by the person whose life is
falsified no it was better to be
straight even queer audiences themselves
believe that especially in Hollywood's
golden age when it was a dirty secret
most people yearned to be rid of but
there was an odd dichotomy developing in
Hollywood
whereas lesbian or bisexual female
characters could be redeemed in a film
by being paired off with the right man
in the end bisexual or gay male
characters had no such luxury in the
film Adam's Rib which was released in
1949 David Wayne plays the role of Kip
who is a yardstick par Excellence
Kip serves as Catherine Hepburn's
girlfriend acting as a high-class Ethel
Mertz to her feminist Lucy Ricardo
despite Catherine Hepburn's defense
Spencer Tracy's apparent unease around
him cannot be denied as they were
leaving the room following a heated
discussion over feminism Wayne said to
Hepburn you've got me so convinced I may
even go out and become a woman when
Wayne has gone Spencer Tracy mutters and
he wouldn't have far to go either
Hepburn's Amanda can only shush him an
indication that her feminism like that
of contemporary feminists who wanted
their sons to grow up to be real men
goes only so far and breaks down at the
thought of actually obscuring sex and
gender roles altogether yet the
unyielding conviction in the masculine
role along with the hatred that this
ideology bred
was about to be shaken to its very
Foundation the buddy system that had
been used during the second world war
had brought troops closer together than
they had ever been before men who loved
each other's company but always selected
women to display their manhood were
forced to confront their innate
sexuality in the all-male atmosphere of
military forces this brought to the
surface a misunderstanding regarding
men's fundamental sexuality
the worry that these heterosexual
relationships between men may in any way
be interpreted as being gay was a very
genuine one and the movies made sure
that there was no indication of
homosexuality involved in depictions of
such Partnerships there might have been
less suspicion of homosexuality had the
level of paranoia surrounding its very
mention not been so high
in 1946 Richard Brooks's novel The Brick
Foxhole dealt with obsessive masculinity
in the military in it a gay decorator is
murdered by a soldier he brings home to
his apartment for a drink the 1947 film
adaptation Crossfire made the victim a
Jewish person and thus became an example
of Hollywood's maturity in dealing with
anti-Semitism the New York Times noted
the change in a review but said only
that the motivation for the murder had
been changed to good Advantage The
novel's crucial discussion of men's
striking out at what they fear in
themselves was omitted whenever all male
circumstances were the topic of the
movies whether they were Cowboys sports
or Soldiers the fantasy of the
unfettered perennially youthful man in
pure and unsullied Brotherhood battled
over the ever-present societal taboo
against male closeness director Clarence
Brown toyed with this in his film flesh
and the devil in which John Gilbert and
Lars Hansen play lifelong friends who
separate when one of them marries the
woman they both love played by Grand
Garbo by the end of the film Garbo has
slept with both of them precipitating a
reluctant duel between the two men
trying to stop them she falls through
some thin ice and drowns at this the men
throw down their guns Embrace and walk
off into the sunset together their arms
around each other their bond rejoined
following the intrusion of a woman
Clarence Brown spoke of the situation in
an interview you can see my problem
how to have these two Leading Men wind
up in each other's arms and not make
them look like a couple of fairies Joan
melon in her study of masculinity in the
movies Big Bad Wolves says that the less
violent men were in their film personas
The more likely they were to be
interested in heterosexual love just the
opposite has been true for homoeroticism
the perception of homosexual feelings as
a brutal furtive dangerous Force
flourished in films about male bonding
and violence playing off of the idea of
homosexuality being innately Criminal
gentlemen in the movies Jimmy Stewart
and any movie about small town USA would
never even subtextually approach such
relationships or feelings the concept of
the gentleman who chooses to love other
men did not exist in American Film
except in comedy in the films of Laurel
and Hardy their relationship was given a
sweet and very real loving Dimension a
classic example of this one with
unmistakably gay overtones is 1932's
their first mistake Hardy's wife
complains that he sees too much of
Laurel and not enough of her and the two
friends discussed the situation well
what's the matter with her anyway no I
don't know
she says that I think more of you than I
do of her
foreign
but we won't go into that you know what
the whole trouble is
what what you need is a baby in your
house well what's that got to do with it
well if you've if you had a baby and it
would keep your wife's mind occupied and
you could go out nights with me and
she'd never think anything about it so
they go out and adopt a baby
when they return home with it they
discovered that Hardy's wife is suing
him for divorce for alienation of
affections having named Laurel as the
other woman the remainder of the film is
a beautifully timed and performed
domestic scene with Laurel and Hardy in
bed with the baby between them the
obviousness of the coding has been
lambasted ever since the film's release
with Charles Barr in his study of Laurel
and Hardy saying that there is something
rather absurd about discussing this
seriously at all
in the often infantile pre-sexual
Nursery World in which Stan and Ollie
lived such Behavior would be natural I'd
agree that it is in fact natural but the
idea of there ever having been a
pre-sexual time is reaching
but notice that it is the naturalness of
Laurel and Hardy's behavior that Barr
and other critics choose to defend not
the sexuality and so it is indeed an
attack on americanism itself to suggest
that homosexuality is present in the
Laurel and Hearty routines in pointing
these things out one attacks the
American illusion the illusion that
there is in fact such a thing as a real
man and that to become one is as easy as
changing one's name from Marion Morrison
to John Wayne the fact is that comedy
has been able to comment on sexual roles
more readily than drama could only
because people may dismiss it as an
impossible first neglected buddy
relationships exist even in classic
cartoons while Disney may not have liked
hearing it but there are gay overtones
in the relationships of more than one
pair of beloved animated figures from
his classic years
in 1940s Pinocchio Honest John and
Gideon a fox and a cat are best friends
who procure Lost Boys for sale to an
evil Coachman who takes them to Pleasure
Island they seduce Pinocchio with the
hit song High diddly D the second line
of which is high diddly day an actor's
life is gay in Cinderella everyone's
favorite mice jock and Gus Gus volunteer
to help finish Cinderella's dress in
time for the ball
but they are quickly admonished by a
female Mouse to leave the sowing to the
women their relationship grows
throughout the film and later when
Cinderella describes how she was swept
off her feet by the handsome prince Gus
Gus puts an arm around Jock's shoulder
and holds him close
and of course from the competition there
was Bugs Bunny giddy to throw on a dress
and a wig at the first available
opportunity the real emotions in the
movies at the time with exceptions for
films like Gone With the Wind always
took place between men
men had been the important forces at
work both as instigators of all the
action and plots and as instigators of
the films themselves by deciding what
movies should and should not be made
when screenwriter Gore Vidal discussed
the script for the 1959 version of Ben
Hur with director William Weiler they
concluded that the Rivalry between Judah
Ben-Hur Charlton Heston and his
boyfriend Masala Stephen Boyd was
insufficiently motivated by a single
political scene in which Ben Hur refuses
to Aid the Roman cause despite his
friend's pleas
Fidel described the problem I proposed
the notion that the two had been
adolescent lovers and now Masala has
returned from Rome wanting to revive the
love affair but Ben Hurd is not
he has read Leviticus and knows an
Abomination when he sees one I told
Wyler this is what's going on underneath
the scene
they seem to be talking about politics
but Masala is really trying to rekindle
A Love Affair
and Weiler was startled
we discussed the matter and then he
sighed well anything is better than what
we've got in the way of motivation but
don't tell Chuck
I did tell Stephen Boyd who was
fascinated
he agreed to play the frustrated lover
study his face in the reaction shots in
that scene and you will see that he
plays it like a man starving it was 1959
and filmmakers were on the verge of new
creative freedoms Vidal was saying that
it made sense that the two men should be
attracted to each other
theirs was the most vibrant and
interesting relationship in the film
Weiler later told Vidal the biggest
mistake we made was the straight love
story
if we had cut out the girl all together
and concentrated on the two guys
everything would have gone better
director Howard Hawks always
concentrated on men in his films and in
his films things went better
than in Ben Hur at least in 1948's Red
River hawks's only use for Joe Andrew
was to have her tell John Wayne in
Montgomery Clift what we can already see
my bit expected trouble for days when
when anybody would have a mind would
know you two love each other yet the
nature of that love despite Cliff's
scene Persona doing for his character
what Garbo did for Queen Christina
remained hidden despite one of the most
re-watched and arguably most homoerotic
scenes in any film at the time being one
in which Montgomery Clift and John
Ireland compare their
pistols the only open acknowledgment of
the homosexuality and Buddy films came
from those critics who attributed the
misogynist attitudes of such films to
the covert gayness in them when Joseph
McBride and Gerald Perry in an interview
in film comment questioned Hawks about
the gay undertones of his films Red
River in particular Hawks told them it
was a goddamn silly statement to make
it's easy to see how directors might be
oblivious to the subtexts that are
present in their own work since
homosexuality is a viable alternative
has been repressed both in the lives of
men and in their work on screen the
taboo against male closeness is taken
far more seriously than it is in real
life where it is more likely to be seen
as a neutral gay sensibility some people
contend that there is no such thing as a
gay sensibility since the presence of
such a thing would imply the existence
of a straight sensibility which is
something that unquestionably does not
exist yet a gay sensibility can take on
various forms and it is possible for it
to be present even when there is no
indication of homosexuality either overt
or covert in front of or behind the
camera the need to conceal one's sexual
orientation for such a significant
portion of one's life is primarily
responsible for the development of a gay
Sensibility
it is a ghetto sensibility that was
developed out of the necessity to
cultivate and employ a second site that
would interpret discreetly what the
world sees and what the actual reality
may be it was gay sensibility that for
example often enabled some lesbians and
gay men to see at very early ages even
before they knew the words for what they
were
something on the screen that they knew
related to their lives in some way often
it was the simple recognition of
difference the sudden understanding that
something was altered or not what it
should be perhaps the role reversal of a
Dietrich or agarbo evoking a hidden
truth about the nature of sexuality in
general or it may have been the tone in
James Dean's voice as he zipped up the
jacket of the Dead salominio In Rebel
Without a Cause And muttered
he's always cold
it was the sense of Yearning that was
there in these encounters the unsaid
forbidden desires that were always there
but were always repressed even if the
parts did not fit together until years
later it was a voice that could not be
ignored with no real homosexuals allowed
on screen in the 40s and 50s sensors
often began looking for these hidden
messages
sometimes they found them even when
there were real things that were
abundantly clear in the film rope for
instance directed by Alfred Hitchcock in
1948 Farley Granger and John Dahl play
the role of two pretentious gay lovers
who on a whim murder a former Prep
School classmate
they do this because they believe they
possess a superior intellect and are not
morally responsible to a crass Society
the sensor's attention was drawn not to
the exact relationship between the
characters but rather to the discourse
between them Arthur Lawrence recalls
that when he finished his screenplay for
rope he left England for America and
while he was in America the script was
passed on by American censors rope came
from an English play called rope's end
and while I was in New York the producer
Sydney Bernstein took a few passages
from the play and put them back in the
script
so when it came back from the Hayes
office every one of those passages was
circled with the common homosexual
dialogue written in the margin and do
you know what they were it was simply
that they were saying things like my
dear boy to each other and the way that
the English talked was known as fruity
over here it's actually a long-held myth
within film circles that the reason
Hitchcock filmed rope to appear as one
long unedited take was so that sensors
would be unable to force him to cut any
perceived gay content without altering
the artistic intent of the film there
were also other more covert homosexual
relationships in Hitchcock films such as
the one between Martin Landau and James
Mason North by Northwest and more
strikingly the one between Robert Walker
and Farley Granger in strangers on a
train nonetheless the filmmaker only
seldom offered commentary on matters of
this nature regarding his work but
Arthur Lawrence later said we never
discussed hitch and I whether the
characters in rope were homosexuals but
I thought it was apparent I guess he did
too but it never came up until we got to
Casting we'd wanted Cary Grant for the
teacher in Montgomery Clift for one of
the boys and they both turned it down
for the same reason their image
they felt they couldn't risk it
eventually John Dahl and Farley Granger
played the boys and they were very aware
of what they were doing he also stated
that Robert Walker was the one who
suggested playing Bruno Anthony as a gay
character in the film strangers on a
train the strangeness of their agreement
was emphasized by the friction that it
caused between his malignantly Faye
Bruno and Granger's golly gee tennis
player guy Haynes in compensation for
the death of Bruno's despised father guy
agreed to take the life of Bruno's
undesirable wife and put an end to guy's
marriage Bruno's homosexuality emerged
in phrases that would be used
progressively during the 50s to describe
gays as aliens because of his icy
demeanor his dark imagination and the
elitist superiority that he exuded he
was an extension of the clever but
lethal archetype Philip and
Brandon the lovers in rope were warped
individuals who murdered out of a belief
in their own moral and intellectual
superiority which they believed placed
them outside the law by existing outside
the culture such gays were able to deny
explicit homosexuality while at the same
time reinforcing specific stereotypes
this is how Oscar Wilde's The Picture of
Dorian Gray could reach the screen in
1945 shorn of its more bizarre sexual
implications while offering George
Saunders as a symbol of sophisticated
decadence
such ghettoized characters pre-saged the
gay as alien images of the 1950s and had
their roots in the same
anti-intellectualism and mistrust of
difference that had characterized the
shaping of Hollywood's image of the
normal American man the view of the
homosexual as being alien to his own
Society was also present in the constant
deletion of specific homosexuality from
the screen adaptations of literary Works
in 1945 Billy Wilder brought Charles
Jackson's novel The Lost weekend to the
screen with Ray Milland as the alcoholic
writer Don Burnham in Jackson's novel
Burnham's alcoholism stems from a
complex variety of reasons that include
a father fixation and a false accusation
of his having had a gay relationship
with a college frat brother in Wilder's
version of the Lost weekend however the
motivation for Burnham's drinking
becomes a simple case of writer's block
the only frames of reference for the
majority of gay people were these covert
signals and hidden indicators of
homosexuality in Hollywood movies the
majority of gay people learned about
themselves mostly through movies that
stated the rest of the world was
straight a documentary entitled word is
out which was released in 1977
demonstrated that the majority of gay
people living in the United States had
the misconception that they were the
only ones like them in the entire world
several years later when the Supreme
Court finally ruled that it wasn't
obscene to portray homosexual content on
screen films that were more overtly gay
helped pave the way for the
legitimization of homosexual subject
matter on screen nonetheless throughout
the early and middle part of the 1950s
the invisibility of homosexuality was
enforced with an almost fanatical
paranoia the perversity of the outsider
the Oddball or the alien screen
character was very noticeable in an era
built around rigid Conformity such as
the 1950s the equation between being
different in any way
and being gay was easy to see
in 1952's my son John Dean Jagger and
Helen Hayes played the distraught
parents of a young man who is
well not gay but a communist agent
played by Robert Walker when their
suspicions about their son's activities
are confirmed it's an American Tragedy
suddenly they see their son as Shifty
and unfamiliar a thing with no respect
for God or country an unprincipled
monster to whom they can no longer
relate
the healthy family disappears blocker's
coldness his superiority and his open
contempt for his parents and their way
of life conspire to create a perverse
unnaturalness in a 1950 New York Times
story The Republican National committee
chairman asserted that sexual perverts
who have infiltrated our government in
recent years are perhaps as dangerous as
actual Communists by December of that
year
4954 suspected homosexuals had been
removed from employment in the federal
government the lavender scare was
gripping Washington and with the help of
a future president would soon dig its
claws deep into Hollywood as well
foreign
[Music]
in the early 20th century the United
States experienced a period of political
persecution and anxiety known as the Red
Scare there were two different eras in
American history that are collectively
known as the Red Scare both of which
were marked by widespread anxiety over
communism and other leftist ideas the
first Red Scare happened in the wake of
World War One and is rarely spoken about
and the second occurred in the midst of
the Cold War in the late 1940s and early
1950s to a considerable extent the 1917
Bolshevik Revolution in Russia was to
blame for the onset of the first Red
Scare it's no secret that many Americans
especially those in positions of
authority were worried about the
emergence of the Soviet Union and the
expansion of Communism in Europe in
response to this perceived threat the
American government enacted a set of
laws intended to limit the freedoms of
those who were either Communists or
sympathizers of the Communist cause the
Sedition Act of 1918 was one of the most
notorious pieces of legislation enacted
at the time because it made it a crime
to criticize is the government anyone
suspected of being a communist or
Anarchist was subject to prosecution
under these statutes regardless of
whether or not they had committed any
real crimes the American Protective
League was one of the several private
groups formed during the first Red Scare
with the authority to investigate and
report on suspected subversives during
the height of the Red Scare the American
Legion spearheaded a drive to identify
and punish suspected traitors after
World War II tensions between the United
States and the Soviet Union grew once
again sparking the second Red Scare
during this time communism was again
considered a major danger to American
democracy and its way of life the
inquiry undertaken by Senator Joseph
McCarthy known as the McCarthy hearings
was one of the most important events of
the second Red Scare McCarthy claimed to
have a list of people who were either
Communist party members or sympathizers
and he used his position in government
to initiate a series of Investigations
and interrogations to flush them out
dramatic confrontations and high profile
charges typified the McCarthy hearings
which had far-reaching effects on
American culture many individuals were
punished for their suspected communist
links even though there was no proof to
back up the claims Witnesses were
questioned under duress throughout the
trials to get them to identify other
Communists who were under suspicion even
if they were judged not to be communist
supporters many people were blacklisted
and lost their employment as a
consequence of the proceedings because
of McCarthy and his associates harsh
methods and disregard for due process
the hearings became notorious
but the hearings came to an end in 1954
when McCarthy was censured by the senate
for his conduct during the
investigations marking the beginning of
the end of McCarthy's political career
the hearings are now widely viewed as a
dark chapter in American history in 1950
many politicians journalists and
citizens thought that homosexuals
actually posed more of a threat to
National Security than Communists one
columnist argued there is no record of
comparable corruption in American
history in a national radio broadcast
noted liberal Elmer Davis said it looks
as if the enemies of the state
department and of the administration
generally have gotten hold of a more
profitable issue than communism Senator
Kenneth weary asked his Senate
colleagues can you think of a person who
would be more dangerous to the United
States than a pervert and multiple of
President Harry Truman's top advisors
wrote him memos stating the country is
more concerned about the charges of
sexuals in government than about
Communists in the UK it was just about
social Purity yet in America the
existence of gay men specifically was
somehow a matter of life and death
historians of the McCarthy period have
paid surprisingly little attention to
the lavender scare despite the
widespread worry and even Panic it
caused at the time the significance of
Party politics and foreign policy in the
emergence of the National Security State
is emphasized by political historians of
McCarthyism anti-communism and the
establishment of the National Security
State while the role of moral and
cultural concerns is downplayed anytime
the lavender scare is discussed it is as
an afterthought of the Red Scare that is
so obvious that it doesn't ever need
explanation the overlapping worries of
Communism and homosexuality have been
largely ignored in even the most recent
examinations of McCarthyism both
defenses from the right and criticisms
from the left many people who supported
McCarthy back in the 1950s considered
the systemic expulsion of gays from the
state department and other government
positions to be his most lasting
achievement senator Joseph McCarthy
alleged in February of 1950 that there
were 205 Communists working in the state
department that's a month under
Secretary of State John Purifoy said
that the state department had permitted
91 homosexuals to retire after this some
said the president Harry Truman's
government was insufficiently concerned
about the threat posed by homosexuals
the Senate started looking into
homosexuals working for the government
in June of 1950. although the findings
weren't made public until December
throughout that time there was a sharp
rise in the number of government
employees let go because of homophobic
harassment or discrimination when asked
about quote sexual perverts who have
infiltrated our government in recent
years Republican National chairman guy
George gabrielson claimed that they were
perhaps as dangerous as the actual
Communists however being homosexual
wasn't the only reason they were in
danger homosexuals were observed as
security threats because they were
believed to be more vulnerable to
Blackmail as top counsel of his
Congressional subcommittee McCarthy
employed Roy Cohn who himself was
homosexual and died of AIDS decades
later because of his attempts to protect
his reputation he insisted that his
doctor treat him for liver cancer so at
the same time that his immune system was
dying he was undergoing Cancer
Treatments that destroyed what was left
of his white blood cells at the same
time he also pulled what strings he
could to get on the experimental HIV
medication that was still undergoing
medical trials AZT which
destroyed his liver someday we will
progress as a community to the point
where the only remaining Legacy of Roy
Cohn is as the villain of Tony kushner's
iconic stage play angels in America
but we're not quite there yet because
Cohn and McCarthy with the help of FBI
director J Edgar Hoover who is also
believed to have been gay were
responsible for the dismissal of
thousands of gay government employees
and the intimidation of many of their
political opponents into Silence by
spreading false allegations about their
sexual orientation the state department
revealed that it had dismissed 425
workers due to charges of homosexuality
in the closing months of the Truman
Administration in 1953. McCarthy's
anti-communist campaign often fused the
second Red Scare with the lavender scare
by using allegations of homosexuality as
a smear tactic reporters were once
subjected to the following statement if
you want to be against McCarthy Boys
you've got to either be a communist or a
when proof of communist
activity was absent McCarthy allegedly
used guilt by association by equating
communism and homosexuality with mental
instability the general public and even
politicians had a common view that gays
and Communists were both morally weak or
psychologically Disturbed as well as
Godless and destructive to traditional
families for instance McCarthy openly
discussed two individuals case 14 and
case 62 on the senate floor as
Communists who posed unsafe risks due to
their homosexuality he said that a
high-ranking intelligence officer had
informed him that every active communist
is Twisted mentally or physically
implying that those with the peculiar
mental twists of homosexuality were more
susceptible to recruitment by Communists
many of the male workers at the state
department started to feel uncomfortable
even being there because of the
Department's new association with
homosexuality they were quite adamant
about not being seen in pairs and they
often introduced themselves with words
emphasizing their straightness hi I'm so
and so I work for the state department
and I'm married and I have three
children executive order 104.50 enacted
by President Eisenhower in 1953
prohibited gays from holding federal
government positions and established
security criteria for federal employment
as a direct result of these policies
hundreds of only gay State Department
employees were outed and fired about 5
000 gay individuals including private
contractors and military personnel lost
their jobs at the federal government as
a result of this presidential order the
victims were not only fired from
employment
but also outed to the public this
presidential order expanded Truman's
loyalty program by including sexual
perversion among the actions that
disqualified a person from holding a
federal post many new rules and
practices were implemented to identify
and expel persons who identify as
homosexual lesbian or bisexual it was
common practice to conduct interviews
and check for overt displays of
homosexual biases as part of these new
methods to detect gaze people were
judged guilty not just by connection
with those who frequented the same
homosexual clubs as the suspects they
may also be questioned if members of
their immediate or extended family had
gay Tendencies or gay connections by the
mid-1950s similar repressive and
oppressive policies had been enacted in
States and local governments as well
expanding bans on hiring lesbians and
gay men to cover 12 million workers more
than 20 percent of the United States
labor force all of whom were required to
sign Oaths attesting to their moral
Purity in order to obtain or maintain
employment but McCarthy's crew of
homophobes were about to have the sites
trained on themselves when Roy Cohn
brought on G David shine as Chief
consultant to the McCarthy staff
speculation arose that shine and Cohn
had a sexual relationship during the
Army McCarthy hearings Cohn denied being
closer than an ordinary friend to shine
or having any special interest in him
Army Council Joseph Welch seemed to
elude to cohn's sexual orientation
throughout the proceedings did you think
this came from
Define
he might be an expert on that yeah yeah
I should say
I should say Mr Senator that a pixie is
a close relative of a fairy McCarthy's
unwavering support for cone fueled
rumors that the senator was either
coerced by his senior counsel or that
their relationship went beyond
professional boundaries McCarthy often
engaged in homosexual activities Nevada
publisher Hank Greenspun said in 1952
and claimed that he was a regular at the
White Horse Inn
a Milwaukee gay nightclub all this
attention eventually led to Roy Cohn
being removed from his post alongside
McCarthy and helped fuel McCarthy's own
downfall in due time the McCarthy period
as a whole came to an end in the middle
of the 1950s when Nicole V young
judgment in 1956 significantly reduced
the authority to remove anyone from the
federal government with discriminatory
grounds however the lavender scare
continued for many more decades the
Florida legislative investigative
committee also known as the Johns
committee or flick was another
manifestation of the lavender scare that
endured established in 1956 the flick
lasted until 1964 before being dissolved
the committee's mission in Florida was
to investigate and fire homosexual
Public School teachers carrying on the
lavender scare and spirit if not
entirely in practice and it wasn't until
the Obama Administration that military
service for openly gay people was
allowed since the don't ask don't tell
policy was just another executive order
104.50 under a different name but though
the lavender scare unofficially came to
an end with the fall of McCarthyism
after multiple Decisions by the Supreme
Court defang the senator and left him
nothing but a paper tiger The Fear and
Loathing toward homosexuals as well as
accused Communists survived much longer
in Hollywood even before McCarthy began
his Crusade producers in California had
been blacklisting anyone even remotely
connected to Communism thanks to
pressure from future president of the
United States Ronald Reagan who was then
the president of the Screen Actors Guild
many Hollywood professionals were called
to appear before the house on American
Activities Committee in October of 1947.
it was announced that the committee
would look into allegations that
communist spies and supporters had
planted propaganda in Hollywood movies
Walt Disney spoke first during the
proceedings Disney testified that
Communists posed a severe danger to the
film business and identified many former
employees as possible Communists in
contrast other leading Hollywood figures
including director John Houston and
actors Humphrey Bogart Lauren Bacall
Judy Garland and Danny Kaye organized
the committee for the First Amendment to
protest the government's targeting of
the film industry of the people working
in Hollywood that the house on American
Activities Committee was interested in
many were accused of being members of
the communist Party USA of the initial
witness list of 43 19 declared that they
would not give evidence 11 of the
original 19 were questioned by the panel
on Monday October 27th the hearings last
phase began and members of the committee
for the First Amendment traveled in from
throughout the country
to participate only one of the 11
unfriendly Witnesses writer Bertolt
Breck agreed to speak with the committee
after which he fled the country ten
others declined claiming their right to
free expression and assembly under the
First Amendment the question are you now
or have you ever been a member of the
Communist party was one which they flat
out refused to answer the committee
formally accused these ten of contempt
of congress and began criminal
proceedings against them in the Full
House of Representatives the house on
American Activities Committee hearings
failed to turn up any evidence that
Hollywood was secretly disseminating
communist propaganda but the industry
was nonetheless transformed producers
and Studio heads were now on the watch
for any and all anti-American activity
fearing further investigation from the
government especially ones that might
lead to government censorship which
they'd only narrowly avoided decades
before so as Hollywood always does they
chose to self-censor before being told
to this began a Crackdown on any
directors writers or actors who might be
communist or gay The Echoes of
McCarthyism were sounding loudly in the
Hollywood Hills and the association
between gay and communist were
inseparable by then and as mentioned in
previous episodes Hollywood was more or
less stuffed full of gay men and women
working in any one of a multitude of
roles in the industry this resulted in
multiple well-respected directors moving
to Europe and sending many more
up-and-coming and well-established
actors even further into the closet
suddenly films about the fear of
extraterrestrials became hot tickets in
Hollywood as a narrative device to help
instill fear of anything even slightly
different to the masses of the growing
Suburban America these monsters from
outer space were Communists gays and
people of color these aliens could be
anything and everything John and Martha
were afraid of which thanks to Senator
McCarthy
was a lot of things but no theme was
more prevalent than the alien
shapeshifter the ones who could live
alongside the normal people corrupting
them from within Communists coming for
your husbands gays coming for your sons
the Red Scare and the dread of communist
infiltration into American culture are
commonly seen as metaphors in the 1956
science fiction classic Invasion of the
Body Snatchers the film has also been
seen as a homosexual allegory by any
number of reviewers and Scholars
throughout the years the film's
narrative revolves around an
extraterrestrial invasion of Earth and
the subsequent infiltration of soulless
carbon copy humans developed in pods the
Pod inhabitants begin to symbolize as
the film unfolds a society that is
driven by uniformity and tries to
eliminate individuality and uniqueness
this uniformity and Conformity theme has
been linked to the gay experience in the
1950s ever since
many gay individuals in the past were
pressured to conceal their identities
and mask their sexual orientation
because of the widespread stigma
associated with being gay at the time
the film's depiction of the pod people
paints them as robotic drones devoid a
feeling and individuality in addition
the film's characters are a misfit crew
that the perceived conventional Society
Rejects and ignores people who insist
that something nefarious is occurring
are sometimes branded as insane or
paranoid similar to the experiences of
gay people who were frequently
disregarded and mocked by the larger
society the characters in this story are
members of a minority group who are
trying to persuade the world of a threat
that only they can see Invasion of the
Body Snatchers is undoubtedly a film
that reflects the societal anxieties of
its time and can also be seen as a
powerful gay allegory by exploring
themes of Conformity individuality and
marginalization the film speaks to the
experiences of many gay people who
struggle to find Acceptance in a society
that sought to erase their differences
Invaders from Mars features a similar
plot to Invasion of the Body Snatchers
David the film's protagonist is a
creative and sensitive young man who is
ridiculed and excluded from school he
has a difficult time relating to people
even his own father with whom he has a
tense relationship many members of the
queer Community especially around the
time the film was released have
experienced feelings of alienation and
exclusion similar to those shown in the
film actor Arthur Franz who plays
David's father in the film has been
speculated to be homosexual in real life
Morris ankrum who was also thought to be
gay plays Dr kelston an investigator of
the UFO phenomena there are aspects in
Invaders from Mars that may be seen via
a queer lens even if that wasn't the
film's original intent from the
underlying ties between the male
characters to the overt themes of
possession and Invasion the 1939 film
nanochka has also been interpreted by
film critics as an allegory for lesbian
desire and love firstly the character of
Nina played by Greta Garbo is a Stern
and serious Soviet Envoy who comes to
Paris to supervise a group of three
bumbling comrades who have been sent
there to sell Jewels seized during the
Russian Revolution Nina is initially
portrayed as cold and unfeeling but she
begins to thaw as she falls in love with
the Charming and carefree count Leon
dalgol played by Melvin Douglas this
Dynamic of a strict and buttoned up
woman being seduced by a more carefree
and flamboyant man is a common Trope in
Classic Hollywood films but it also
mirrors the expectation that more manly
or serious women would lighten up and go
straight eventually the Assumption among
many was after all that the only thing
stopping a lesbian from being a happy
Homemaker was finding the right man
finally there is the character of Irma
played by Bella Lugosi Irma is portrayed
as a flamboyant and Theatrical figure
with a campy and exaggerated manner of
speaking and gesturing while the
character is not explicitly identified
as queer the fact that Lugosi himself
was bisexual and often played roles with
homoerotic undertones has led some
viewers to interpret Irma as a coded
representation of queer desire and from
a completely opposite direction we have
the notorious Plan 9 from Outer Space
from the infamous filmmaker Ed Wood
while the film has long been considered
a cinematic disaster it has also been
celebrated for its campy subversive
qualities in particular many critics and
Scholars have interpreted the film as a
queer allegory one way in which the film
can be seen as a queer allegory is
through the character of the alien
leader Eros Eros is portrayed as a
flamboyant effeminate figure with his
distinctive attire makeup and mannerisms
he moves with a graceful almost poetic
quality and his speech is melodramatic
and Theatrical his characterization is
so exaggerated that it goes well beyond
mere stereotyping and instead creates a
queer icon that challenges and subverts
traditional gender Norms another aspect
of the film that can be interpreted as a
queer allegory is its underlying
critique of Conformity the plot revolves
around the alien's plan to destroy Earth
because they view it as a threat to
their own culture and way of life this
can be seen as a commentary on the
obsessive forces of Conformity that
queer individuals have often faced the
aliens desire for uniformity and
sameness can be read as a metaphor for
the societal pressures to conform to
heteronormative standards and
expectations and even the internal
expectations of the queer Community
finally the film's low budget campy
style can be seen as a celebration of
the marginal and the underground
in the context of queer culture Camp has
often been used as a way to resist and
subvert dominant cultural norms the
film's deliberately bad acting special
effects and overall production value can
be seen as a queer refusal to conform to
traditional Hollywood standards or maybe
I'm reaching a bit with that one but
suffice to say the 1950s were a time of
strict social conformity in America the
culture was dominated by the ideal of
the nuclear family where a husband
worked and provided for his wife and
children while the wife stayed at home
and took care of the household
any deviation from this Norm was
considered dangerously deviant and
subject to social ostracization this of
course included homosexuality which was
widely seen as a mental illness or a
moral failing gay people in the 1950s
faced significant oppression from the
dominant culture as well as legal and
social sanctions homosexuality was
illegal in every state and those who
were caught engaging in same-sex
activities could face imprisonment or
institutionalization in Mental Hospitals
in this culture of fear and secrecy gay
people were forced to hide their true
selves and Lead double lives whereas
suspected communist agents chose to lead
double lives many gay men and women were
also forced into marriages with the
opposite sex in order to maintain
appearances and avoid suspicion these
marriages were often unhappy and
unfulfilling for both partners and they
often ended in divorce or estrangement
this further reinforced the idea that
homosexuality was a choice and that gay
people could choose to be straight if
they wanted to gays and lesbians were
also subject to violence and
discrimination in many areas gay bars
were the only places where they could
meet and socialize however these spaces
were often raided by police who would
arrest patrons and subject them to
violence and humiliation These Bars were
actually rated more often than suspected
communist hideouts gays and lesbians
were considered easier targets by the
police and since the government believed
a queer person could easily be turned
communist arresting them was killing two
birds with one stone the policing of
gender norms and the emphasis on
Conformity made it nearly impossible for
gays and lesbians to be themselves and
live fulfilling lives it wasn't until
the Stonewall riots of 1969 and the
subsequent gay rights movement that
things began to change in America but
Hollywood would begin to ease up on the
depiction of gay people in the 1960s
but mostly in coded ways but even with
deep deep coding
there was a catch
anyone confirmed to be gay or even
heavily coded to be
wouldn't have it easy and to live a life
true to themselves
they might just have to die for it
[Music]
as the film industry moved away from
Suburban Perfection the extensive
efforts made by Hollywood to conceal
homosexuality and film during the
post-war lavender scare era began to
deteriorate and then Hollywood came to
realize that they were ignoring a large
audience
no not gays at the time the lifeblood of
Hollywood was relationship dramas Disney
and fleisure cartoons and biblical epics
however they ultimately realized that a
group of Americans with disposable
income but little to spend it on was
being excluded
teenagers who were incensed to fight
back against their parents conservative
confining outlook on life this
rebellious nature spawned arguably the
most famous adolescent dissident film
ever made Rebel Without a Cause the film
contained broad Illusions to alternative
sexual behavior and the Alternatives
offered by gang ritualism Plato played
by salminio is the Loneliest and most
troubled of the three problematic
adolescents in the film the other two
being James Dean and Natalie Wood
although he is not accused of it Plato
was raised by a domineering housekeeper
in the absence of his father which at
the time was considered fertile breeding
ground for homosexuality Plato is a
multi-faceted character who challenges
traditional gender and sexuality Norms
he's a sensitive and artistic young man
who admires James Dean's gym and aspires
to be like him their relationship is not
explicitly sexual but homoerotic tension
permeates it Plato's attraction to Jim
originates from his need for a mask role
model in his life who can offer him the
emotional support that he lacks at home
Jim is a troubled teenager who struggles
to blend in with his peers and family
nevertheless Jim's sensitivity and
emotional vulnerability contradict his
society's expectations of masculine
Behavior he is also drawn to Plato
despite being confined by the street
gang culture of the 1950s the writer of
the film Stuart stem said the gang in
Rebel Without a Cause isn't much
different from the Army both the rituals
are tribal the affection and gang
Behavior has to be hidden inside a
different vocabulary both spoken and
unspoken inside gestures and Words which
desensitized everything and made
everything brutal also they had to wear
skins to keep the image intact boots and
leather they had to put on a horse skin
in order to feel defended against the
discovery of their own Sensitivity I
don't know what other experiences in
World War II were but for us it was
deliberate and conscious
we were told that the buddy system
prevailed the choice of a buddy was as
or more critical than that of a bride
you'd be living in a kind of physical
intimacy which was unlike any other men
were having the experience of never
having been so close to other men and
there was something of that love
operating within the structure of the
teenage gang whose members had left home
where there wasn't much love
to fight each other in the streets
fighting may have been a pretext for
being close and Rebel Without a Cause
when Jim and Buzz another gang
Associated teen decided to enter a
chicken race to the edge of a cliff a
race in which buzz will die the two
regard each other for a moment and
question their participation in such an
event their encounter becomes the
motivation for all that follows Jim
refuses to deny his feelings and in the
screenplay stem uses the character's
guilt and grief over the death of Buzz
as a weapon against Conformity one of
the things I wanted to show in Rebel is
that underneath all the macho
defense there was that Pure Drive for
affection and didn't matter who the
recipient might be
there was a longer time in those days
for young men to be in that Warrior
phase where a lot of romantic
attachments were formed before
heterosexual encounters happened my
favorite moment in the film is not
between Jim and Plato but between Jim
and Buzz who dies in the chicken race it
was tender and loving and the killing of
that boy whom Jim had known for all of
12 minutes motivated the entire last
half of the film additionally Rebel
Without a Cause challenges the
conventional gender roles of women in
society as well Natalie Wood portrays
Judy Jim's girlfriend who struggles to
find her position in a man's world
Judy's relationship with Jim is
complicated because they struggle to
express their emotions to one another
however Judy's character is also
noteworthy because she challenges
conventional Notions of femininity she
opposes the role of the passive
submissive woman in favor of asserting
her autonomy and agency the release of
pent-up emotions due to this type of
emotional repression is what ultimately
kills buzz and Plato while Jim is secure
in Judy's arms clearly adult
responsibilities include settling down
in a heterosexual relationship contrary
to the illusions of your teenage years
homosexuality is deemed ignorable
until the end of adolescence after that
it's considered a sort of sign of
Arrested Development as we entered the
latter half of the 1950s and beginning
of the 1960s this appeared to be
Hollywood's perspective on homosexuality
as well theoretically gay characters
could exist in Hollywood films but only
with one of two conclusions either they
straighten themselves out or they die
and Hollywood was not hesitant to make
films expressing this to the audience
burying your gaze in media has existed
for much longer than Twitter and Tumblr
may think TN sympathy is a classic
example of repression through coercion
the play and film have become so
emblematic of the traditional remedy for
homosexuality securing the love of a
decent woman in the nick of time that
people have forgotten that it's actually
a tale about a timid heterosexual Robert
Anderson who adapted his own play for
the big screen in 1956 employs the
classic Outsider archetype of the man
who marches to the beat of a different
drummer and must endure the red ridicule
of his peers in neither the film nor the
play as it ever suggested that the
sensitive student Tom Lee might prefer
men over women the issue at hand is the
allegation of homosexuality Lee's
classmates Call Him Sister boy because
like Jim from Rebel Without a Cause he
refuses to run with the pack Tom prefers
Bach to baseball and the companionship
of his housemaster's wife Laura to touch
football his male tormentors disregard
the fact that he is obviously in love
with the Elder woman because he does not
fit the stereotypical male role in the
Vincent Minnelli film the majority of
the accusatory remarks about
homosexuality were toned down Thomas
found swimming nude with a teacher who
is also suspected of being gay in the
play in the film he's labeled queer
because he's discovered stitching a
button onto his shirt while lounging on
the seashore with a group of Faculty
spouses the suppressed homosexuality of
Tom's primary Tormentor the masculine
housemaster played by Leif Erickson who
married Laura to establish his
masculinity is also subdued in the film
adaptation Ericsson disregards Laura in
favor of the young male Macho pupils
that he instructs in Tea and Sympathy a
heterosexual youth is falsely accused of
homosexuality by adults whose sporting
activities provide the most homoerotic
action on screen Tom Blends in well as a
scapegoat Femme in the well-established
friendships between his classmates
therefore the film Advocates tolerance
not for sexual deviation but for
disadvantaged heterosexuals who are less
masculine never is homosexuality
considered a viable option for a genuine
man the message is that one cannot
presume a young man is homosexual solely
on the basis of his football performance
when Laura ultimately sleeps with Tom
she is not sparing him from a life of
sissiness but rather from his own fear
that his classmates may be correct about
his sexuality a fear that has already
led him to attempt suicide writer Robert
Anderson said to me it was never a play
about homosexuality when Leif Erickson
hounds Tom Lee he's really persecuting
what he fears in himself Tea and
Sympathy which again was not about
homosexuality nevertheless served as a
lesson for a generation of gay men who
perceived Tom Lee's tormentors pointed
accusations not as timid heterosexuals
but as horrified homosexuals the film
was able to convey a portion of what
actual homosexuals felt and experienced
in the 1950s while staying faithful to
the cultural imperative of invisibility
cultural necessity was of course in the
hands of the production code and there
was never any thought given to making
the homosexuality in Tian sympathy
moreovert in the film even the prospect
that someone could be gay in reality was
eliminated prior to the commencement to
filming Deborah Kerr wrote to Vincent
Minnelli the Breen office is very
difficult about the homosexual angle
which is I understand their objection
adultery is okay impotence is okay but
perversion is their bet Noir in fact
adultery was not okay and so it came
under attack from the Catholic Legion of
decency anyway the all already altered
ending of Tea and Sympathy had to be
made to reflect the necessary
retribution for Laura's affair with Tom
thus the finished movie taught that
instruction and initiation by an older
woman was a positive thing but that at
the same time such Behavior could not be
condoned at least not for the woman
Laura gives herself to Tom undoes the
top button of her blouse and says years
from now
when you talk about this
and you will
be kind
this is how the stage version concludes
the fall of the curtain left the
conclusion of the encounter to the
audience's imagination this however was
not good enough for Hollywood it filmed
the seduction scene with a subdued
reverence reminiscent of a church
service the way the scene was filmed in
the woods with the birds chirping and
the special lighting made it appear more
like the second coming of Christ than
the first coming of Tom Lee a glaring
epilogue provides the morally correct
conclusion that makes the preceding
material acceptable to the Legion of
decency at his class reunion 10 years
later Tom wears the largest gold wedding
band ever observed up close on film
Tennessee Williams stepped up to the
plate to provide what became yet another
comment on the foreign gay twice
previously Williams's plays were adapted
for the big screen with significant
homosexual references removed in each
instance the adapters asserted that the
homosexual aspects of the play were not
needed from a dramatic point of view in
1951 the pro problem that Blanche Dubois
encountered with her husband was omitted
from the film adaptation of A Streetcar
Named Desire in 1958 the homosexual
implications in the relationship between
brick and the deceased Skipper were
removed from Cat on a Hot Tin Roof in
both instances The Producers emphasized
that homosexuality was not the point and
was readily discarded in favor of more
acceptable explanations then in 1959 two
years before the production code was
actually revised to permit homosexual
subject matter on screen
Suddenly Last Summer dealt with the
subject as a psychosexual circus act as
the 1950s almost demanded the
homosexuality of Sebastian Venable
Williams's condemned poet could be
inferred but not shown if the brainoff
is granted special permission as a
consequence of the combination of
insanity and cannibalism the film had an
unpleasant sickly Ambiance that made
everyone involved approach it with
caution Catherine Hepburn who portrayed
Violet Venable Sebastian's deranged
mother publicly conveyed her disdain for
the topic Ken Geist the biographer of
director Joseph mankiewicz claims that
mankowitz and Spencer Tracy spent the
greater part of an evening in Boston
explaining homosexuality to Catherine
Hepburn but she flatly refused to
believe that such people existed she
need not have made such a commotion over
Suddenly Last Summer though in a meeting
with producer Sam Spiegel and
screenwriter Gore Vidal the Breen office
eliminated all references to homosexual
relationships Gore Vidal said my script
was perfectly explicit
and then the Catholic Church struck the
Legion of decency after seeing that the
necessary Cuts were made gave the film a
special classification since the film
illustrates the horrors of such a
lifestyle it can be considered moral in
theme even though it deals with sexual
perversion it was resolved that
Sebastian Venable would not appear in
person in the film according to Vidal he
was destined to be a glimmer an occasion
for memory with this decision Hollywood
had accomplished the unthinkable
it has portrayed an invisible gay man on
screen in the film Elizabeth Taylor's
character Catherine recounts how she and
Sebastian spent their days in a Spanish
Hamlet on the seashore and discloses
that Sebastian used her to seduce young
men Sebastian's efforts were effective
due to the boy's desperation for cash
however when he began to make
preparations for his departure to
Northern Europe Sebastian and Catherine
were accosted by a group of youths
pleading for money on a scorching day
when Sebastian rebuffed their advances
they pursued him through the city
streets Sebastian attempted to flee but
the boys followed him wherever he went
in the meantime Catherine had been
feverishly attempting to catch up to
Sebastian but when she finally did she
found him surrounded by men
Catherine claims that they tore
Sebastian apart limb by limb
and ate him Henry Hart a film critic
discussed the origins of Suddenly Last
Summer in the January 1960 issue of
films in review it is said that
Tennessee Williams wrote Suddenly Last
Summer when a psychiatrist advised him
that for his own sake not to mention
societies he had better stop denigrating
normality and begin to expose the evils
of homosexuality and its Allied forms of
Vice this Williams did
regardless of whether the advice
actually came from a therapist
Williams's tormented depiction of a
flailing homosexual artist and the
individuals he victimizes with his
aberrant impulses is a classic horror
Tale the creature is finally destroyed
by an angry mob of Street Urchins in a
climax similar to that of James Wales
Frankenstein in which the peasants
pursue the monster to the top of a hill
where he is consumed by Flames what
emerged from Suddenly Last Summer was a
simple horror film with a budget a film
with a high moral tone that was
ultimately unable to investigate its own
subject but even the overt mention of
homosexuality in a film starring
Catherine Hepburn and Elizabeth Taylor
shook the foundations on which the
production codes aversion to
homosexuality stood the erosion of the
power of the production code to maintain
specific taboos had begun at the outset
of the 1950s and was only eroding
Evermore as time went on the California
state Supreme Court ruled in early 1959
after analyzing a case involving a
screening of Kenneth anger's fireworks
that homosexuality is older than Sodom
and Gomorrah and is a legitimate subject
for screen treatment if handled properly
the ruling overturned the conviction of
an exhibitor who had been fined 250
dollars and sentenced to three years
probation for displaying the film
fireworks in 1957. variety referred to
fireworks as an attempt to convey
through impressionism
the homosexual outlook on life in
general and noted that the court opinion
stated that homosexuality is not to be
endorsed but Society must understand its
causes and effects after homosexuality
as a subject reached commercial film
houses seven years later Kenneth anger
Scorpio Rising was eventually released
in theaters albeit specialized Art House
theaters such as New York's Bleaker
Street Cinema and caused a similar stir
once more the film was interpreted to
symbolize homosexual life and attitudes
in General Andrew Saras drew a
homophobic conclusion after viewing
Scorpio rising in the Village Voice and
observing that anger Compares a depraved
homosexual orgy to footage from an
ancient film about the Life of Christ
why the parallel with Christ what else
is there for attractive homosexuals over
the age of 30 besides crucifixion the
treatment of fireworks and Scorpio
Rising by the courts Distributors and
critics indicated how the code would
ultimately evolve even in enlightened
circles homophobia was far too pervade
and unchallenged for homosexual themed
films to be evaluated objectively based
solely on their cinematic Merit there
would be no recognition of the
legitimacy of gay subject matter only a
condescension to a an intermediate adult
audience Hollywood was determined to
reach without alienating the old fogies
Spartacus was one of the last commercial
films to have homosexuality expunged
from its script before the code was
amended in a scene between crassius and
his adolescent subordinate antoninus who
did not look like an adolescent the
elder man discreetly establishes his
preference for both men and women do you
eat oysters when I have the master do
you eat snails
no master do you consider the eating of
oysters to be modeled and the eating of
snails to be immoral
my taste includes
both snails and oysters this exchange
was excised from the finished film
immediately followed by antoninus's
departure to join Spartacus and the
other slaves in Revolt what is therefore
lost is any indication of antoninus's
dread of having a homosexual
relationship with crassius the fear that
causes antoninus to flee at that time so
it just kind of comes out of nowhere
such omissions prompted producers and
writers in the film industry to lament
that the code restricted their artistic
freedom and prevented Hollywood films
from competing in the mature marketplace
with foreign films that dealt with such
subject matters openly at the beginning
of the 1960s the prohibition against sex
perversion was the only specific
restriction on subject matter still in
place for movie censorship the merch
company co-producers of William Wyler's
The Children's Hour launched a
meticulously orchestrated campaign in
the summer of 1961 to prepare the public
for the inevitable they disclosed that
Wyler's second adaptation of Lillian
Hellman's play would restore lesbian
implications to the story which had been
adapted in 1936 with all such references
glaringly absent in the film former
College classmates Martha Doby and Karen
Wright established a private residential
school for girls in the early 1960s
Karen agrees on a wedding date with her
boyfriend a doctor Joe Carden after two
years of Engagement Joe is related to
the powerful Emilia Tilford whose
granddaughter Mary attends the school
Mary is a Pampered manipulative
adolescent who abuses her peers while
Mary is being disciplined for a lie she
told one of her companions overhears
Martha and her aunt Lily arguing Lily
accuses Martha of having an unnatural
relationship with Karen Mary shares this
information with her grandmother Mary
fails to convince others that she
personally witnessed Martha and Karen
interacting but compels Rosalie another
girl to confirm her story by using her
knowledge that Rosalie has stolen
jewelry and other personal items from a
number of people around the school tiny
little blackmailer Mrs Tilford is sued
for libel and slandered by the two women
but a few months later Martha and Karen
have lost the suit and are sequestered
at the school having lost all of their
pupils and suffering irreparable damage
to their reputations as a result of the
loss Karen breaks off her engagement
with Joe after he inquires as to whether
the rumors are true or not and Martha
explains that other female couples have
persevered despite being discovered due
to the intensity of their love and then
confesses that she actually is in love
with Karen and has been in love with her
for years
oh it's just as long as I can remember
but I never knew what it was until all
this happened Karen asserts that
Martha's sentiments are merely confused
but Martha insists that it's love while
breaking down into tears Mary's
deception regarding Martha and Karen is
exposed when Rosalie's mother discovers
the stolen items her daughter has
retained Mrs Tilford tells the judge who
then reverses the outcome of the
litigation and decides to publish
results in the newspaper and pay the
teachers a full Financial settlement
but everything has come too late
and Karen discovers that Martha has
hanged herself in her room
a year later the political drama film
advised in consent based on Alan drury's
Pulitzer prize-winning novel of the same
name was released the film examines the
intricate and frequently treacherous
world of politics in Washington DC where
a nomination for secretary of state
becomes the Battleground for personal
and political agendas while the film
predominantly focuses on political
Intrigue and Corruption the character of
Senator Anderson portrayed by Don Murray
discreetly investigates homosexual
themes young Utah senator Anderson is
designated chairperson of the committee
responsible for assessing the Secretary
of State nominee proposed by the
president as the confirmation hearings
continue Anderson begins to suspect that
the nominee May Harbor
communist sympathies which could
compromise National Security however
Anderson's personal life is scrutinized
when he is coerced by a former male
admirer who threatens to reveal their
past relationship
if Anderson does not withdraw his
opposition to the nomination the film's
portrayal of homosexuality is nuanced
but it emphasizes the personal and
professional dangers gay people
confronted in a society that was still
primarily antagonistic toward them at
the time Senator Anderson is portrayed
as a sympathetic figure who struggles
with the contradictions between his
private and public lives he is
conflicted between his responsibility as
a senator to safeguard the nation
and his desire to live an authentic
existence as a gay man the film
illustrates how his sexual orientation
could be used against him not only by
political adversaries but also by those
who sought to exploit his vulnerability
for personal gain in the end Anderson's
wife receives Anonymous phone messages
from a man warning that if the
subcommittee does not report favorably
on the nominee information about what
occurred between Anderson and Rey in
Hawaii will be made public an anxious
Anderson travels to New York to meet a
fellow Army veteran named Ray shaft
shaft confesses to selling evidence of a
previous gay relationship between the
two
leading
to Anderson suicide the film victim was
released the same year Melville Farr
played by Dirk Bogard appears to be a
successful London attorney in a loving
marriage but he conceals his sexual
orientation from everyone when his
ex-lover Barrett contacts him for
assistance in paying off some
blackmailers he disregards his requests
Barrett has stolen money from his
employers and has been apprehended by
law enforcement knowing that his sexual
orientation would soon be revealed
he commits suicide in his jail cell Farr
now plagued with remorse resolves to
take on the blackmailing organization
but each of the victims he approaches
refuses to assist preferring to pay the
money to keep their private lives hidden
knowing that Dirk Bogart himself lived
his life as a closeted gay man makes
victim all the more poignant from a
retrospective standpoint those who were
familiar with the industry at the time
claimed that his refusal to enter into a
marriage of convenience
hindered his prospects at a successful
career in Hollywood Hollywood continued
to produce similar Works throughout the
1960s and Beyond despite widespread
criticism of these and other films that
perpetuated the barrier gaze Trope
numerous lgbtq plus activists and
Advocates viewed the trend as evidence
of a hostile broader cultural and
political climate towards the community
as a whole they argue that the Trope
contributed to a culture of dread and
shame surrounding queer identities and
reinforced detrimental stereotypes of
queer individuals as ill immoral and
dangerous the practice however persisted
well into the New Millennium but there
was a faint glimmer of hope on the
horizon as the 60s came to a close with
the Stonewall uprisings ultimately
bringing the lives of gay people to the
attention of the general public and then
the gay inclusive x-rated Midnight
Cowboy won the Oscar for Best Picture
the Norms surrounding the depiction of
gay characters in film began to
disintegrate gay people could now exist
in Hollywood good
but for how long
[Music]
the boys in the band is a 1970 American
film directed by William friedkin of
Exorcist Fame based on the 1968
Off-Broadway play of the same name by
Mark Crowley the film takes place in New
York City in 1968 and follows a group of
gay friends who gather for a birthday
party the main character is Michael a
neurotic and self-loathing gay man who
is hosting the party for his friend
Harold a flamboyant and witty gay man as
the night wears on the guests become
increasingly drunk and confrontational
leading to heated arguments and
Revelations about their personal lives
the arrival of a straight friend Alan
adds to the tension as he is
uncomfortable with the gay culture and
the open homosexuality on display as the
night progresses the character's
relationships with each other become
more complicated leading to a climactic
confrontation that exposes their
vulnerabilities and insecurities on the
strength of a classy set of New York
stage reviews and its billing as a
comedy despite its dead serious serious
content the boys in the band was taken
for gospel in an America populated by
people who had never met a homosexual in
their entire lives the film
was not positive but it was fair the
only heterosexual character Alan can
easily despise the Nelly Emery because
he is everything a gay is supposed to be
a butterfly in heat Alan even comes to
pity The Battered in the end but
what scares Alan and the audience what
they could not come to terms with or
understand is the homosexuality of Hank
and Larry who are both just as Queer as
Emery yet look just as straight as Alan
the possibility that there could be
non-stereotypical homosexuals who are
also staunch Advocates of a working gay
relationship is presented by the two
lovers throughout the film
and they are the two characters most
often ignored by critics and analysts it
is Larry who speaks of rejecting
heterosexual concepts of marriage and
creating a relationship with respect for
one another's freedoms with no need to
lie or pretend at the end of the film
Larry and Hank win a telephone Truth
game that Michael has viciously devised
when they call each other and say I love
you
it is when Larry and Hank Express
affection for each other physically and
verbally that the audience and the lone
straight party guests are most
uncomfortable in contrast Michael's
inability to deal with his own
homosexuality is exposed as old-time
movie melodrama and Harold's final
equally melodramatic speech puts it into
perspective
you're a homosexual and you don't want
to be
but there's nothing you can do to change
it
not all your prayers to your God
not all the analysis you can buy in all
the years you've got left to live
you may very well one day be able to
know a heterosexual life
if you want it desperately enough
if you pursue it with the fervor with
which you annihilate
but you'll always be homosexual as well
always Michael
always the speech encapsulated
self-hatred and reflected a generation
of gay men who were indoctrinated to
blame their problems all on their
homosexuality in the end Michael's
self-hatred and inability to function
became as archaic as Harold's habit of
putting his weed in a Band-Aid box in
the Medicine Chest so that he could
flush it down the toilet in case the
cops arrived Michael's weeping fits and
old movie Visions Shone light not on his
homosexuality but on the fallacies and
illusions of Hollywood dreams dreams
that had taught gay men that they were
not welcome in polite Society Hollywood
was not moved to change a wit by all of
this hysteria in gay drawing rooms in
Manhattan though yet boys in the band
moved gay men throughout the country the
internalized guilt and self-hatred of
eight gay men at a Manhattan birthday
party formed the best and most potent
argument for Gay Liberation ever offered
in popular media it provided actual and
personal instances of the detrimental
repercussions of what gay men learn
about themselves through media
falsehoods and the film sparked the
first public pushback by a budding gay
rights movement against Crowley's plays
accepted prejudices gay protesters did
not deny the existence of such
stereotypes but they were quick to point
out that the Viewpoint was one-sided and
the Prejudice is defined as the sole
depiction or representation of any group
of people by a minority stereotype the
boys in the band was a movie about gays
and a gay movie it was a creation born
of a subculture and reflected a harsh
reflection Society viewed it as if it
were a scientific trip but it was an
interior Journey for many gays who were
shocked by the sadness of Michael's
sickening rituals many of Crowley's
caricatures were misconceptions that
gays had accepted and even fit
themselves into since there seemed to be
no other option the audience for boys in
the band included gay people who had
grown up thinking that they were the
only gays in the world the film explored
passing and not being able to pass
loving and not being able to love and
above all else surviving in a world that
denied one's very existence but it did
so before an American public that was at
the stage of
barely being able to mention
homosexuality at all within a few years
of boys in the band there was summer
wishes Winter Dreams in which Joanne
Woodward's Sons homosexuality is solely
perceived in terms of how it impacts her
current midlife crisis as yet another
sign of her failure as a wife and mother
she eventually comes to terms with it
but her son leaves for Amsterdam with a
friend and refuses to visit his parents
until they can live with him as he truly
is he makes their reluctance to
recognize him as a full person their
problem
a family affair rather than his a very
natural thing the first film with
homosexual Liberation themes designed
for commercial distribution was then
released in 1973. the film investigated
the possibilities available to gay
couples on society's terms and raised
the questions how do two guys who refuse
to play society's game Define a
non-roll-based relationship while the
film was inspired by the Gay Liberation
movement it was dismissed as a trivial
soap opera by The Establishment press
and Savaged by gay liberationists for
its romantic Illusions and lack of
radical conviction David an
ex-seminarian teaches School in New York
City and settles into a monogamous
relationship with Mark a straight
identified insurance salesman in the
film the first part of the movie
examines their meeting romance Union and
split the relationship is a protracted
and planned Love Story parody in which
they go to the Opera roll in the fall
leaves in Central Park watch each other
shave in the morning and imitate every
heterosexual movie cliche about love and
marriage the connection ends due to
Mark's reluctance to be possessed and
David's nagging fears David investigates
the Alternatives in the second half of
the film promiscuous sex and Fire Island
bath houses and orgies are as
unsatisfactory to him as his persistent
loneliness David meets Jason a divorce
photographer who helps him begin to
alter his Notions about the nature of
homosexual relationships Freedom From
The Assumption of roles in an
unstructured relationship is difficult
to depict on film in a poetic style
without inviting skepticism but the
filmmakers were aware of this and
purposefully opted to regard romance as
the bottom line as a result of the
filmmakers couching his message in such
endlessly romantic terms the picture
enraged the same people fighting for
such a political redefinition a very
natural thing had such significant
promotion and distribution issues that
it had little influence however it is
still viewed as a breakthrough film in
queer Cinema Theory classes the New York
Post described it as an argument rather
than entertainment while Judith Christ
said if the Gay Liberation movement
wants its own mediocre movie
here it is elsewhere in cinemas John
Schlesinger's Sunday Bloody Sunday was a
poignant understanding and interesting
story that has consistently been cited
since as an example of a good gay film
that failed to make it at the box office
proof that homosexuality is not a
money-making proposition in movie terms
the problem however was in the packaging
Sunday Bloody Sunday was a talky
introspective British production that
wasn't intended for a wide audience in
the United States it was noted in the
1980s that there appears to be very
little room in the American Market
anymore for the small but interesting
film according to producers and writers
this is now the specialty of Television
films interesting how history repeats
itself as small and interesting now
seems to be the Forte of streaming
services this film Schlesinger said is
not about the sexuality of these people
these movies never seem to be about the
sexuality of the people in them these
people were a gay doctor a straight
career lady and a bisexual artist with
whom they were both in love Sunday
Bloody Sunday was not about sexuality as
Schlesinger correctly said however it
was a film in which alternative
sexuality was taken for granted
something that gay activists had long
sought it was a film on human
relationships and how they do not always
correspond to our expectations of what
love should be the film portrayed a
joyful ending for a gay character whose
boring resignation is not the result of
his homosexuality in his final monologue
he informs the audience they say
it never made you happy and I said but I
am happy
apart from missing him all my life I've
been looking for somebody courageous
resourceful
he's not it
but something
we were something
but America despised Sunday Bloody
Sunday one kiss between the men created
even more controversy than scenes of
them in bed together male male
relationships were characterized by
nothing but sex yet genuine love between
men was frowned upon in most eyes and it
was the first time on screen when a
loving kiss between two men was not
intended to shock or repulse in American
Cinema it drew gasps from Spectators and
as a result several theaters refused to
book the film at all however it provided
gay moviegoers with a mostly positive
experience even if they were the only
people in the theater aside from the
more serious gay films gays were popping
up in small roles all over Hollywood
mostly As comedic foils perhaps most
famously in Mel Brooks's The Producers
but all of this laughter was lost on the
national gay task force which issued a
set of guidelines for Studios to follow
including homosexuality isn't funny use
the same rules you have for other
minorities if bigots don't get away with
it if they hate Catholics they they
can't get away with it if they hate gays
stereotypical people do exist but if
such a minority of any group receives
exclusive media exposure
that is bigotry hmm
television which is subject to the
regulation of the FCC and to the
reaction of its advertisers to vocal
public opinion was more vulnerable to
this type of activist pressure than was
the motion picture industry television
programming which aired nearly 24 hours
a day was always in need of societal
concerns to address
homosexuality being one of them a film
must be a success but if a television
show fails there is always next week and
another subject to try therefore
experimentation was encouraged pressure
from Gay Liberation influenced
television's approach to portraying
homosexuality for the American audience
and it was successful in achieving a
more balanced and surely more prolific
discourse on television than in film
Archie Bunker Norman lear's Charming
bigot first encountered homosexuality in
1972 when he realized that one of his
drinking buddies a former football star
was gay
how long you know me
10 12 years yeah
in all that time did I ever mention a
woman
but what difference does that make you a
bachelor so
I know but pastors there they're always
acting kind of private exactly
oh come on
watching from the White House President
Nixon declared it distasteful
because it made a good man look like a
fool it is unclear if Nixon was talking
about Archie Bunker or the football
player that same year ABC made a
significant step forward in the
portrayal of ordinary gay men on
television that certain summer a
two-hour movie of the week presented the
story of a divorced dad who chooses to
tell his 14 year old son that he is gay
when his son arrives for a weekend visit
when the father eventually gets around
to describing the issue to his son the
boy rushes away unable to deal with it
for gay liberationists The Narrative was
a little too soft while it earned
glowing reviews in the mainstream press
several gay writers criticize it for
being too hesitant and unduly cautious
but with the critical success of that
certain summer the barriers seemed to
come crashing down for television by the
mid-1970s queer characters had appeared
on virtually every sitcom drama and talk
show in prime time TV All in the Family
Rhoda mod Barney Miller Mash The Bob
Newhart Show and scores of others
featured gay characters the naked civil
servant and the war Widow two
spectacular television dramas were
uplifting depictions of the lives of
lgbtq people both real and fictitious
both series instilled in its key
characters a sense of history and their
position as strugglers for sexual
Freedom both shows revealed a hidden
aspect of the gay experience through
romance and humor although Quinton
crisp's story in the naked civil servant
was not a gay liberationist's Dream by
any means gay is greatly admired and
respected crisp's defiant lifestyle when
you're being followed there are a number
of rules to obey
never look back
[Applause]
on no account run
[Music]
gradually increase the pace to five
miles an hour
[Music]
if this does not deter him
do not stop until forcibly stop
stand still and look at him it may work
Studio Do You Think You Are
be very polite
it may work
no one really
sir offer money it may work yet no gay
Heroes emerged on the movie screen at
least not until the release of Dog Day
Afternoon the film directed by Sydney
lament and starring Al Pacino is a
complex and nuanced exploration of the
queer experience set during a bank
robbery gone awry in Brooklyn the film
tells the story of Sunny a man who Robs
a Bank in order to pay for Leon's
Sunny's Partners gender confirmation
surgery Leon isn't given a feminine name
in the movie FYI as the story unfolds we
learn more about sunny and Leon's
relationship we discover that Leon is a
pre-op trans woman and sunny is willing
to do whatever it takes to support her
including robbing a bank to fund the
procedure this is a powerful statement
about the lengths that queer people will
go to in order to support and care for
one another especially in a society that
is often hostile and unwelcoming the
film also explores the impact of queer
identity on the character's
relationships with their families when
Sonny's mother comes to the bank to try
and talk him out of the robbery he
reveals to her that Leon is a trans
woman
her reaction is one of shock and disgust
another important queer theme in Dog Day
Afternoon is the way that Sunny
sexuality and gender identity intersect
with his working class background
throughout the film we see Sunny
interacting with other members of his
community including his friends and the
police officers who are trying to
negotiate with him his working class
background is an important part of his
identity and it's clear that he feels a
sense of loyalty and connection to his
community something not often seen among
queer characters who were usually
artists or working in fields of high
esteem like universities made for a
budget of 3.5 million dollars it went on
to gross 56 million dollars at the box
office or 381 million dollars when
adjusted for inflation and was nominated
for six Oscars including best picture
bursting the bubble of the assumption
that movies with queer characters and
themes can't succeed but Al Pacino
returned to gay Cinema five years later
with cruising which
did not go over so well cruising was
based on a 1970 novel by the New York
Times editor Gerald Walker that
portrayed the process by which a New
York city policeman assigned to capture
a psychotic killer of gay men becomes
aware of his own homosexuality and then
commences killing gay men the gay
characters in the novel are all filled
with self-hatred and hatred for the
people who turned them gay the blame
usually falls on the first man with whom
they had sex the killer Intimates that
the homosexual lifestyle is an
inherently violent one the killer in the
film adaptation knifes his victims to
death during or immediately following
sex and the film opens with a shot of a
gangrenous severed arm floating in the
Hudson River Al Pacino's character a cop
immerses himself in the underground of
heavy leather and sadomasochism as the
film goes on he becomes agitated and
Restless a state brought about by his
own sexual identity crisis though his
motives are never explored or explained
when he finally locates the killer he
stabs him which puts the killer in the
hospital under police custody Pacino's
assignment is over
however
another murder follows
this time that of Pacino's gay next door
neighbor who was the only relatively
happy gay character in the movie it is
implied in the end that Pacino himself
had committed this final murder and the
film ends with him gazing at himself in
a mirror in a statement to the press the
director screenwriter William friedkin
of boys in the band said that he was not
sure who the real murderer was and that
furthermore he did not consider the
murderer to be homosexual a more likely
conclusion is that friedkin deliberately
obscured the identity of the killer
either consciously or unconsciously as a
response so the wave of protests that
arose in the summer of 1979 when he
began filming gays who protested the
making of the film maintained that it
would show that when Pacino recognized
his attraction to the homosexual world
he would become psychotic and begin to
kill so freedkin avoided that situation
by leaving the ending of the film
relatively ambiguous yet friedkin
realized that his film said what gay
activists claimed it said and he had a
disclaimer to all Prince of the film
this film is not intended as an
indictment of the homosexual world
it is set in one small segment of that
world which is not meant to be
representative of the whole gay
audiences around this time began to see
that Hollywood was willing to overlook
successful queer films but would admire
themselves in their failures the most
insightful and important films were
those which had been made in struggle by
small groups of people and against
tremendous odds the producers and
directors of the British film Nighthawks
spent five years preparing and Gathering
funds for their film about a gay teacher
who spends his nights cruising in bars
and discos and having one-night stands
Nighthawks offers an almost documentary
style look into the evening cityscape of
the ritualistic life of a man who is
becoming aware that he lives two lives
the dispassionate view of London gay
nightlife allows a gay male audience to
experience the hunt as more than a
passive spectator there is an uncanny
feeling that each member of the audience
is himself cruising recognizing a look a
gesture a glance then realizing it is
meant for the character in the film
through whose eyes we are looking no
slick and Sensational Hollywood Peep
Show Nighthawks is a perceptive film
with modest intentions and it succeeded
without compromising its scope for
commercial reasons while William
friedkin was on New York streets filming
the blood and guts Hollywood version of
the gay underground Nighthawks opened in
New York and got what turned out to be
better reviews than cruising would get
six months later and some queer
filmmakers were willing not just a step
outside of the Hollywood System
but all over it John Waters became
synonymous with the queer underground
Cinema movement of the 1970s thanks to
his outrageous and subversive style
Waters films are known for their
irreverent humor over the top characters
and outrageous subject matter he has
always been drawn to the marginalized
and the taboo and his films often
explore themes of sexuality gender and
identity many of his films feature queer
characters and he has been credited with
helping to break down barriers and
challenge stereotypes about queer people
especially the messy ones and we love a
messy queer waters's film female trouble
released in 1974 is a classic example of
his queer Cinema the film follows the
story of Don Davenport played by the
Divine Divine who is a rebellious
teenager with a troubled home life she
runs away from home and becomes involved
in a series of crimes ultimately leading
to her downfall the film features a cast
of characters that includes drag queens
sex workers and other Outsiders who
challenge societal Norms of gender and
sexuality another notable film in waters
Canon is desperate living the film takes
place in a fictional town called
mortville where the residents are all
social outcasts and deviants the film
features a cast of characters that
includes a lesbian couple a transgender
woman and a group of militant feminists
the film is a
dark comedy that explores themes of
power privilege and oppression and most
iconically
there's Pink Flamingos the queerness of
this film is evident in the way it
portrays its characters and its themes
and it remains a potent example of the
power of queer Cinema to disrupt and
subvert
all expectations Gentlemen of the press
get ready cause you are about to witness
the biggest news event of the year live
homicide one of the most striking
aspects of Pink Flamingos is the way it
portrays its Central character Divine is
a larger than life figure both in terms
of her physical appearance and her
personality she is a force of nature
unapologetically embracing her own
queerness and challenging anyone who
tries to limit or control her her
sexuality is fluid and she engages in
relationships with both men and women
throughout the film in addition to its
portrayal of queer characters Pink
Flamingos also explores themes that are
Central to the queer experience the
film's focus on Outsiders and those who
are marginalized by mainstream Society
is a recurring theme throughout with
characters like Divine and her cohorts
living on the fringes of society and
rejecting traditional norms
at the same time Pink Flamingos is also
a celebration of queer culture and a
testament to the power of queer
resilience despite the violence and
degradation they face Divine and her
cohorts remain defiant refusing to be
cowed by the oppressive forces of
society their queerness is a source of
strength and a way of connecting with
others who share their experiences
creating a sense of community and
belonging in the face of adversity
content warning though Waters films are
also notable for their celebration of
Camp a style that Embraces theatricality
and excess water's influence on the
world of film and popular culture is
undeniable he has inspired countless
artists and filmmakers and his work has
been celebrated for its subversive and
irreverent humor his films have also
helped to pave the way for a greater
representation of queer characters and
stories in mainstream media by
challenging societal norms and pushing
boundaries Waters has left an indelible
mark on the world of Cinema and Beyond
these queer under underground films
opened the minds of many who wanted
nothing to do with queer people
throughout the 1970s we continued to
appear on some of the most popular TV
shows in the world such as Dallas and
mash and in 1979 came the groundbreaking
documentary before Stonewall the
documentary combines archival footage
interviews with queer activists and
Scholars and personal accounts to
Chronicle the history of the queer
community in America it highlights the
experiences of queer people in different
regions of the country and in various
spheres of society including the Arts
politics and even Sports one of the
documentary's key strengths is its
emphasis on diversity in the queer
Community the film showcases the lives
of people like Bayard Rustin a gay
African-American civil rights leader who
worked with Martin Luther King and
Sylvia Rivera a transgender activist who
played a significant role in The
Stonewall riots film and television were
now being used to show the world that we
were people
complex and diverse and with a burgeon
and queer political power structure
rising up in California New York and DC
as well as a crop of new gay filmmakers
beginning to be noticed by Hollywood it
seemed like we were ready to tear down
those closet doors for good and in the
summer of 1981 pre-production had even
begun on making love a major Studio film
from 20th Century Fox about a married
man coming to terms with his
homosexuality and the love triangle that
develops between him his wife and
another man but in that same summer
a rare cancer began appearing in gay men
followed by a cluster of pneumocystis
pneumonia cases in San Francisco and New
York
and then gay men across the world
began dying
and suddenly
Hollywood's opinion of us
didn't matter so much